---
abstract: |
    The abstract should summarize the contents of the paper and should
    contain at least 70 and at most 150 words. It should be written using
    the *abstract* environment.

    \addvspace
    \baselineskip
    We would like to encourage you to list your keywords within the abstract
    section
author:
- Sara Colantonio$^1$
bibliography:
- 'mybibfile.bib'
title: Traceability
---

\titlerunning{Reproducibility}
\authorrunning{S. Colantonio}
\institute{$^1$Institute of Information Science and Technologies "A. Faedo" of the National Research Council of Italy (ISTI-CNR), Via G. Moruzzi, 1, 56124 Pisa, Italy}
\toctitle{Lecture Notes in Computer Science}
\tocauthor{Authors' Instructions}
\maketitle
\bigskip
**Definition**

([@ALTAI_2020])\
\
**Abstract**

This entry introduces the motivations behind traceability and
illustrates its core requirements, which encompass documenting the
entire development cycle of an AI model and tracking its live
functioning after the deployment in production.

Motivation and Background
=========================

Developing an Artificial Intelligence (AI) model or an AI-powered system
entails a considerable number of choices along the entire development
process, which may result in diverse behaviours and functioning of the
same model or system. This phenomenon is particularly relevant when
learning-based approaches comes into play, due to the dependency of
Machine Learning (ML) models on the data used for their training as well
as the complexity and variety of the ML methods that might be used,
especially when based on Deep Learning (DL). Furthermore, the
development of such models relies often on large trial-&-error
experimental processes, which are not commonly well documented (see the
reproducibility entry).

This condition makes it evident the need for a comprehensive and clear
documentation of the actions taken as well as the various processing
steps performed when developing an AI or ML model, as, without this
documentation, it might be difficult to reconstruct the reasons behind
the outcomes and the functioning of an AI model. In consideration of
this, the High-Level Expert Group on AI (AI HLEG) has included the
traceability of an AI model as one of the main mean to enable the
transparency principle for Trustworthy AI ([@HLEG_Trust]). Overall,
traceability aims to ensure the avoidance of any "grey" area about the
AI model or system, thus guaranteeing the transparency of and the trust
in the development, production functioning and usage of an AI system.
The record-keeping activity entailed by traceability should regard the
data used, the data pre-processing steps as well as the development
settings, the development workflows and the actors involved
([@bucker_2022]). This encompasses the detailed provision of information
about the provenance and the usage of any data and artefacts involved in
the development of the AI model or system. In this view, traceability
incorporates the measures to ensure reproducibility and it can be
understood as the technological mean for guaranteeing the auditability
and accountability of AI models and systems [@Future_AI_2021].\

The two souls of traceability
-----------------------------

AI models based on learning are data-inductive and dynamic systems,
whose development relies on an initial set of data. This set, although
large, might not necessarily span the whole variability range of
real-world cases or conditions. This implies that, when used in
practice, the AI model or system can encounter slightly different or
novel data that differ from those it has been exposed to during
training. This phenomenon calls for the monitoring of AI models after
their deployment in production, in order to log their usage as well as
to that tracks over time their performance, vitality and conduct. Such
an AI maintenance system is an important part of traceability, which can
be then seen as one principle, two souls:

-   provenance tracking of data, processes and artefacts involved in the
    development of the AI model

-   continuous performance monitoring of the AI model after deployment
    in production.

These two aspects will be further explained in the following entries.\
\
\

Provenance Tracking
===================

\

Continuous Performance Monitoring
=================================

Monitoring the live functioning of a produtionalised ML/AI model or
system is an emergent topic that is gaining increasing attention as more
and more methods are being deployed in industrial, commercial and public
sectors. As any other piece of software, any tool based on AI/ML needs
to be maintained over time, for fixing bugs and ensuring quality. ML
models and systems require specific strategies that take into account
their nature of learning from data.

Idealistically, the behaviour of ML models trained on sample
well-curated data is expected to generalise on new, unseen data in the
post-deployment phase. Nonetheless, this happens rarely in practice, and
a model's performance assessed live is often different from the
performance evaluated offline during development. Furthermore, it is
well-known that the performance of an AI model or system degrades over
time.

Several phenomena have been identified as drivers of this decay. The
input data fed into the ML model may contain unexpected patterns not
present in the training datasets. Moreover, the characteristics of data
may change over time, causing that the relationships at the core of the
ML methods do not stand valid any more.

This phenomenon, termed *concept* or *model drift* ([@Tsymbal_2004]),
can lead the model to make wrong predictions. Additionally, if the
nature (or distribution) of the input data become vastly different with
respect to those used for training, the performance can even drop below
acceptance. This phenomenon is known as *covariate shift*
([@sugi_2012]). Performance degradation can also result from the impact
that the same deployed ML model may have on the decision process that it
supports. The ML model may influence other elements involved in the
decision or induce an overall change in the phenomenon that is being
modelled, which was not taken into account during training.

Overall, after its deployment, an ML method can come across several
difficulties and changes that the level of efforts and skills needed in
its maintenance could be an order of magnitude higher than that needed
in model building.

Given these concerns, several strategies and best practices have been
investigated to monitor the behaviour of ML methods after deployment,
also in relation to any consequence the methods can have. The first work
published in 2015 described the various challenges that ML methods raise
after deployment in relation to data dependencies, model complexity,
reproducibility, testing, and changes in the external world
([@Sculley_2015]). After that, several methods have been presented in
the literature, focusing specifically on data ([@Polyzotis_2017]), on
the role of humans in ML deployment ([@Flaounas_2017]), on testing
strategies ([@Beck_2016]), or the definition of a general framework to
track ML methods in their live functioning (e.g., pipelines, datasets,
execution configurations, code and human actions) ([@Sridhar_2018]).

Overall, the best practices, promoted also from industrial actors
([@Accenture_2017; @SaS_2019]), include a continuous monitoring of the
ML system to assess its quality and "vitality". Various types of metrics
are suggested in this respect, focusing mainly on performance
evaluation. The idea is to detect changes in the behaviour and then act
via re-training or implementing an active learning approach (when
reinforcement learning is adopted), so as to rectify any wrong conduct.
It should be noted that model maintenance can be seen as nurturing the
model, as it can take advantage of the new knowledge coming from the
real-setting scenario, thus it can produce an improvement of the
original version released.

Monitoring and maintenance can be performed in a *proactive* or
*reactive* fashion. Proactive monitoring works to identify the input
samples that deviate significantly from the patterns seen in the
training phase and to analyse them more in detail to understand any
drift. The reactive approach entails detecting a wrong output and
identifying its causes, so as to understand how the method can be
rectified.

The Continuous Delivery ([@Wolff_2017]) and DevOps ([@Loukides_2012])
approaches have been also proposed to better manage the risks of
releasing changes to Machine Learning applications and, then, do them in
a safe and reliable way.

\newpage
Introduction
============

You are strongly encouraged to use for the preparation of your
camera-ready manuscript together with the corresponding Springer class
file `llncs.cls`. Only if you use can hyperlinks be generated in the
online version of your manuscript.

The LaTeX source of this instruction file for LaTeX users may be used as
a template. This is located in the "authors" subdirectory in
<ftp://ftp.springer.de/pub/tex/latex/llncs/latex2e/instruct/> and
entitled `typeinst.tex`. There is a separate package for Word users.
Kindly send the final and checked source and PDF files of your paper to
the Contact Volume Editor. This is usually one of the organizers of the
conference. You should make sure that the LaTeX and the PDF files are
identical and correct and that only one version of your paper is sent.
It is not possible to update files at a later stage. Please note that we
do not need the printed paper.

We would like to draw your attention to the fact that it is not possible
to modify a paper in any way, once it has been published. This applies
to both the printed book and the online version of the publication.
Every detail, including the order of the names of the authors, should be
checked before the paper is sent to the Volume Editors.

Checking the PDF File
---------------------

Kindly assure that the Contact Volume Editor is given the name and email
address of the contact author for your paper. The Contact Volume Editor
uses these details to compile a list for our production department at
SPS in India. Once the files have been worked upon, SPS sends a copy of
the final pdf of each paper to its contact author. The contact author is
asked to check through the final pdf to make sure that no errors have
crept in during the transfer or preparation of the files. This should
not be seen as an opportunity to update or copyedit the papers, which is
not possible due to time constraints. Only errors introduced during the
preparation of the files will be corrected.

This round of checking takes place about two weeks after the files have
been sent to the Editorial by the Contact Volume Editor, i.e., roughly
seven weeks before the start of the conference for conference
proceedings, or seven weeks before the volume leaves the printer's, for
post-proceedings. If SPS does not receive a reply from a particular
contact author, within the timeframe given, then it is presumed that the
author has found no errors in the paper. The tight publication schedule
of LNCS does not allow SPS to send reminders or search for alternative
email addresses on the Internet.

In some cases, it is the Contact Volume Editor that checks all the final
pdfs. In such cases, the authors are not involved in the checking phase.

Additional Information Required by the Volume Editor
----------------------------------------------------

If you have more than one surname, please make sure that the Volume
Editor knows how you are to be listed in the author index.

Copyright Forms
---------------

The copyright form may be downloaded from the "For Authors\"
(Information for LNCS Authors) section of the LNCS Website:
`www.springer.com/lncs`. Please send your signed copyright form to the
Contact Volume Editor, either as a scanned pdf or by fax or by courier.
One author may sign on behalf of all of the other authors of a
particular paper. Digital signatures are acceptable.

Paper Preparation
=================

Springer provides you with a complete integrated LaTeX document class
(`llncs.cls`) for multi-author books such as those in the LNCS series.
Papers not complying with the LNCS style will be reformatted. This can
lead to an increase in the overall number of pages. We would therefore
urge you not to squash your paper.

Please always cancel any superfluous definitions that are not actually
used in your text. If you do not, these may conflict with the
definitions of the macro package, causing changes in the structure of
the text and leading to numerous mistakes in the proofs.

If you wonder what LaTeX is and where it can be obtained, see the
"*LaTeX project site*" (<http://www.latex-project.org>) and especially
the webpage "*How to get it*" (<http://www.latex-project.org/ftp.html>)
respectively.

When you use LaTeX together with our document class file, `llncs.cls`,
your text is typeset automatically in Computer Modern Roman (CM) fonts.
Please do *not* change the preset fonts. If you have to use fonts other
than the preset fonts, kindly submit these with your files.

Please use the commands `\label` and `\ref` for cross-references and the
commands `\bibitem` and `\cite` for references to the bibliography, to
enable us to create hyperlinks at these places.

For preparing your figures electronically and integrating them into your
source file we recommend using the standard LaTeX `graphics` or
`graphicx` package. These provide the `\includegraphics` command. In
general, please refrain from using the `\special` command.

Remember to submit any further style files and fonts you have used
together with your source files.

### Headings.

Headings should be capitalized (i.e., nouns, verbs, and all other words
except articles, prepositions, and conjunctions should be set with an
initial capital) and should, with the exception of the title, be aligned
to the left. Words joined by a hyphen are subject to a special rule. If
the first word can stand alone, the second word should be capitalized.

Here are some examples of headings: "Criteria to Disprove
Context-Freeness of Collage Language\", "On Correcting the Intrusion of
Tracing Non-deterministic Programs by Software\", "A User-Friendly and
Extendable Data Distribution System\", "Multi-flip Networks:
Parallelizing GenSAT\", "Self-determinations of Man\".

### Lemmas, Propositions, and Theorems.

The numbers accorded to lemmas, propositions, and theorems, etc. should
appear in consecutive order, starting with Lemma 1, and not, for
example, with Lemma 11.

Figures
-------

For LaTeX users, we recommend using the *graphics* or *graphicx* package
and the `\includegraphics` command.

Please check that the lines in line drawings are not interrupted and are
of a constant width. Grids and details within the figures must be
clearly legible and may not be written one on top of the other. Line
drawings should have a resolution of at least 800 dpi (preferably 1200
dpi). The lettering in figures should have a height of 2 mm (10-point
type). Figures should be numbered and should have a caption which should
always be positioned *under* the figures, in contrast to the caption
belonging to a table, which should always appear *above* the table; this
is simply achieved as matter of sequence in your source.

Please center the figures or your tabular material by using the
`\centering` declaration. Short captions are centered by default between
the margins and typeset in 9-point type
(Fig. [\[fig:example\]](#fig:example){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:example"} shows an example). The distance between text
and figure is preset to be about 8 mm, the distance between figure and
caption about 6 mm.

To ensure that the reproduction of your illustrations is of a reasonable
quality, we advise against the use of shading. The contrast should be as
pronounced as possible.

If screenshots are necessary, please make sure that you are happy with
the print quality before you send the files.

\centering
![One kernel at $x_s$ (*dotted kernel*) or two kernels at $x_i$ and
$x_j$ (*left and right*) lead to the same summed estimate at $x_s$. This
shows a figure consisting of different types of lines. Elements of the
figure described in the caption should be set in italics, in
parentheses, as shown in this sample
caption.[]{label="fig:example"}](eijkel2){#fig:example height="6.2cm"}

Please define figures (and tables) as floating objects. Please avoid
using optional location parameters like "`[h]`\" for "here\".

#### Remark 1.

In the printed volumes, illustrations are generally black and white
(halftones), and only in exceptional cases, and if the author is
prepared to cover the extra cost for color reproduction, are colored
pictures accepted. Colored pictures are welcome in the electronic
version free of charge. If you send colored figures that are to be
printed in black and white, please make sure that they really are
legible in black and white. Some colors as well as the contrast of
converted colors show up very poorly when printed in black and white.

Formulas
--------

Displayed equations or formulas are centered and set on a separate line
(with an extra line or halfline space above and below). Displayed
expressions should be numbered for reference. The numbers should be
consecutive within each section or within the contribution, with numbers
enclosed in parentheses and set on the right margin -- which is the
default if you use the *equation* environment, e.g.,
$$\psi (u) = \int_{o}^{T} \left[\frac{1}{2}
  \left(\Lambda_{o}^{-1} u,u\right) + N^{\ast} (-u)\right] dt \;  .$$

Equations should be punctuated in the same way as ordinary text but with
a small space before the end punctuation mark.

Footnotes
---------

The superscript numeral used to refer to a footnote appears in the text
either directly after the word to be discussed or -- in relation to a
phrase or a sentence -- following the punctuation sign (comma,
semicolon, or period). Footnotes should appear at the bottom of the
normal text area, with a line of about 2 cm set immediately above
them.[^1]

Program Code
------------

Program listings or program commands in the text are normally set in
typewriter font, e.g., CMTT10 or Courier.

\medskip
    program Inflation (Output)
      {Assuming annual inflation rates of 7%, 8%, and 10%,...
       years};
       const
         MaxYears = 10;
       var
         Year: 0..MaxYears;
         Factor1, Factor2, Factor3: Real;
       begin
         Year := 0;
         Factor1 := 1.0; Factor2 := 1.0; Factor3 := 1.0;
         WriteLn('Year  7% 8% 10%'); WriteLn;
         repeat
           Year := Year + 1;
           Factor1 := Factor1 * 1.07;
           Factor2 := Factor2 * 1.08;
           Factor3 := Factor3 * 1.10;
           WriteLn(Year:5,Factor1:7:3,Factor2:7:3,Factor3:7:3)
         until Year = MaxYears
    end.

Citations
---------

Page Numbering and Running Heads
--------------------------------

There is no need to include page numbers. If your paper title is too
long to serve as a running head, it will be shortened. Your suggestion
as to how to shorten it would be most welcome.

LNCS Online
===========

The online version of the volume will be available in LNCS Online.
Members of institutes subscribing to the Lecture Notes in Computer
Science series have access to all the pdfs of all the online
publications. Non-subscribers can only read as far as the abstracts. If
they try to go beyond this point, they are automatically asked, whether
they would like to order the pdf, and are given instructions as to how
to do so.

Please note that, if your email address is given in your paper, it will
also be included in the meta data of the online version.

BibTeX Entries
==============

The correct BibTeX entries for the Lecture Notes in Computer Science
volumes can be found at the following Website shortly after the
publication of the book:
<http://www.informatik.uni-trier.de/~ley/db/journals/lncs.html>

### Acknowledgments. {#acknowledgments. .unnumbered .unnumbered}

The heading should be treated as a subsubsection heading and should not
be assigned a number.

The References Section {#references}
======================

In order to permit cross referencing within LNCS-Online, and eventually
between different publishers and their online databases, LNCS will, from
now on, be standardizing the format of the references. This new feature
will increase the visibility of publications and facilitate academic
research considerably. Please base your references on the examples
below. References that don't adhere to this style will be reformatted by
Springer. You should therefore check your references thoroughly when you
receive the final pdf of your paper. The reference section must be
complete. You may not omit references. Instructions as to where to find
a fuller version of the references are not permissible.

We only accept references written using the latin alphabet. If the title
of the book you are referring to is in Russian or Chinese, then please
write (in Russian) or (in Chinese) at the end of the transcript or
translation of the title.

4

Smith, T.F., Waterman, M.S.: Identification of Common Molecular
Subsequences. J. Mol. Biol. 147, 195--197 (1981)

May, P., Ehrlich, H.C., Steinke, T.: ZIB Structure Prediction Pipeline:
Composing a Complex Biological Workflow through Web Services. In: Nagel,
W.E., Walter, W.V., Lehner, W. (eds.) Euro-Par 2006. LNCS, vol. 4128,
pp. 1148--1158. Springer, Heidelberg (2006)

Foster, I., Kesselman, C.: The Grid: Blueprint for a New Computing
Infrastructure. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco (1999)

Czajkowski, K., Fitzgerald, S., Foster, I., Kesselman, C.: Grid
Information Services for Distributed Resource Sharing. In: 10th IEEE
International Symposium on High Performance Distributed Computing, pp.
181--184. IEEE Press, New York (2001)

Foster, I., Kesselman, C., Nick, J., Tuecke, S.: The Physiology of the
Grid: an Open Grid Services Architecture for Distributed Systems
Integration. Technical report, Global Grid Forum (2002)

National Center for Biotechnology Information,
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov>

Appendix: Springer-Author Discount {#appendix-springer-author-discount .unnumbered .unnumbered}
==================================

LNCS authors are entitled to a 33.3% discount off all Springer
publications. Before placing an order, the author should send an email,
giving full details of his or her Springer publication, to
[orders-HD-individuals\@springer.com](orders-HD-individuals@springer.com)
to obtain a so-called token. This token is a number, which must be
entered when placing an order via the Internet, in order to obtain the
discount.

Checklist of Items to be Sent to Volume Editors
===============================================

Here is a checklist of everything the volume editor requires from you:

-   The final LaTeX source files

-   A final PDF file

-   A copyright form, signed by one author on behalf of all of the
    authors of the paper.

-   A readme giving the name and email address of the corresponding
    author.

[^1]: The footnote numeral is set flush left and the text follows with
    the usual word spacing.
